This paper describes a hardware solution to the problem of updating
bitmap displays very rapidly.  Starting from requirements of the
man-machine interface of a powerful personal computing system, it is
seen that it is essential to have hardware support for the `RasterOp'
graphics algorithm which operates on two-dimensional (rectangular)
bitmaps.  The DisArray hardware employs an array of 256 1-bit
processor/memory pairs in a 16 x 16 configuration, thus
directly supporting the manipulation of two-dimensional bitmaps.

A separate, conventional, bit-slice processor provides the array
instruction sequence to execute RasterOp and other graphics algorithms
(such as polygon filling).  Video data is asynchronously extracted
from array memory using a double buffering scheme.

The system can be used in a `display list' mode in which DisArray
continuously interprets an applications-oriented data structure which
describes the screen layout in terms of windows, text strings and
pictures. This operation is fast enough to support animation of a
complex screen layout with no overhead whatever on the applications
software which only operates on the high-level intermediate data
structure.

In future enhancements to the current system we hope to increase the
processing speed still further and to add real-time video data input
into array processor memory. This would allow us to perform some image
processing and pattern recognition tasks and assess the machine's
relevance for these tasks also. We also wish to investigate the use of
the array processor as a host for functional programming environments.

